[Experimental] Add Endpoint Definitions for zPages (#890)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: experimental/trace/zpages.md

### Tracez Details

> For OpenTelemetry, a custom [span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/sdk.md#span-processor) SHOULD be made to interface with the [Tracer API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/api.md#tracer) to collect spans. This span processor collects references to running spans and exports completed spans to its own memory or directly to an aggregator. An alternative to a span processor is using some sort of profiler as a proxy shim layer.

Reviewer: If your comment about the shim or profiler, this is what @maxgolov is really excited about. I think that we can keep it to the span processors for now. As for details of aggregator vs. span processor in-memory, practice showed these details were needed to explain how to implement the feature for new contributors. One piece is missing that one aggregator may be used by many span processors.

```suggestion
For OpenTelemetry, a custom [span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/sdk.md#span-processor) SHOULD be made to interface with the [Tracer API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/api.md#tracer) to collect spans. This span processor collects references to running spans and exports completed spans to its own memory or to an aggregator that can aggregate information from multiple span processors.
```

> For OpenTelemetry, a custom [span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/sdk.md#span-processor) SHOULD be made to interface with the [Tracer API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/api.md#tracer) to collect spans. This span processor collects references to running spans and exports completed spans to its own memory or directly to an aggregator. An alternative to a span processor is using some sort of profiler as a proxy shim layer.

Author: Added!

> There SHOULD be a `data aggregator` that tracks running, error, and latency buckets counts for spans grouped by their respective name. The aggregator MUST also hold some sampled spans to provide users with more information. To prevent memory overload, only some spans MUST be sampled for each bucket for each span name; for example, if that sampled span max number is set to 5, then only up to 55 pieces of span data can be kept for each span name in the aggregator (sampled_max * number of buckets = 5 * [running + error + 9 latency buckets] =  5 * 11 = 55). Aggregation work is recommended to do periodically in batches.

Reviewer: perhaps the image here would be helpful for the reference

> There SHOULD be a `data aggregator` that tracks running, error, and latency buckets counts for spans grouped by their respective name. The aggregator MUST also hold some sampled spans to provide users with more information. To prevent memory overload, only some spans MUST be sampled for each bucket for each span name; for example, if that sampled span max number is set to 5, then only up to 55 pieces of span data can be kept for each span name in the aggregator (sampled_max * number of buckets = 5 * [running + error + 9 latency buckets] =  5 * 11 = 55). Aggregation work is recommended to do periodically in batches.

Author: I'll do that, and could potentially link an image as well!

> There SHOULD be a `data aggregator` that tracks running, error, and latency buckets counts for spans grouped by their respective name. The aggregator MUST also hold some sampled spans to provide users with more information. To prevent memory overload, only some spans MUST be sampled for each bucket for each span name; for example, if that sampled span max number is set to 5, then only up to 55 pieces of span data can be kept for each span name in the aggregator (sampled_max * number of buckets = 5 * [running + error + 9 latency buckets] =  5 * 11 = 55). Aggregation work is recommended to do periodically in batches.

Author: I decided to clarify by adding `Latency spans are spans that complete successfully without errors, and are bucketed according to their end time. Running spans are incomplete spans, which should become latency or error spans at some point. Error spans are ones that complete with an error, which is encoded with a [non-Ok status](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/api.md#status). ` to line 35. Let me know if it looks okay!

An example of what happens when a user includes a wrapper: if OTel Python has Tracez and RPCz implemented and added to that wrapper, that wrapper will create instances of all the needed components (processors, aggregators, etc) for both zPages when zPages is initialized. If or when other zPages are added to OTel Python, developers adding them would only need to add the corresponding initialization code for those components in the wrapper.

Each zPages implementation MUST create a wrapper class for zPages, since they allow users to add all zPages with minimal effort. These wrappers should be as simple as adding 2 lines of code to include zPages (zPages import + initialization line).

### HTTP Server

> All zPages MUST have a HTTP Server to render information on a webpage when a host:port and endpoint is accessed. All zPages MUST be accessed from the same host:port. There SHOULD be handlers to group logic by type of zPage, and there SHOULD be a landing page (at `host:port/` and possibly any invalid endpoints) that links currently implemented zPages for a given repository. Note that HTTP server logic for different languages may differ in how URLs are resolved, so the developer should ensure that expected behavior is achieved. For example, `host:port/tracez`, `host:port/tracez/`, `host:port/tracez/index.html`, and `host:port/tracez/index.html/` should all resolve to the same information.

Author: > What is "repository" in this context?

I believe we want zPages for each language's OTel API/SDK implementation, which is what repository would refer to

> I think this is over-specification. Why does it matter from spec's perspective that host:port/tracez/index.html works?

This is more of an implementation detail I added that a developer may find useful depending on the HTTP server standards for a given language, as I think we want the URLs to resolve to the same content? I can remove it if it's confusing/unnecessary, as it was just a C++ specific thing I ran into

> I am not sure I understand this sentence. Does this mean that getting http://host:port/ should return an HTML page with links to other pages?

Yes, I'm proposing that the root URL and perhaps invalid endpoints should redirect users to an HTML page with links to other pages. Does `At the root host:port/, an HTML page that displays links to currently implemented zPages for that repository should be shown. Similar behavior CAN be implemented for any invalid endpoints as well.` sound clearer?

> Does this for example prohibit that the zPages are accessible both as http://localhost:1234 and http://127.0.0.1:1234?

I was going for all zPages types sharing the same host:port, as in the host and for for host:port/tracez and host:port/rpcz are the same. I think we want the behavior you're describing and localhost should equal 127.0.0.1?

Traditionally, zPages have approached this by rendering web pages purely on the server-side. This means the server would only serve static resources (HTML, CSS and possibly Javascript) when the user accesses a given endpoint. Based on the type of zPage and the server language used, a pure server-side approach would generate HTML pages using hardcoded strings from scratch or using a template; this would tightly couple the data and UI layer.

The following endpoints SHOULD be used for serving files for any HTTP server approach for any zPage:

- `host:port/{zpage}` display the main page and aggregations

> - `host:port/{zpage}/style.css` SHOULD contain the styling logic. This CAN also be embedded in the HTML, but SHOULD be separated and linked in the page head using `<link rel="stylesheet" href="/{zpage}/style.css">`

Reviewer: I think the point here is that styles should not be embedded into the `index.html`. Ideally we need to standardize on this

> - `host:port/{zpage}/style.css` SHOULD contain the styling logic. This CAN also be embedded in the HTML, but SHOULD be separated and linked in the page head using `<link rel="stylesheet" href="/{zpage}/style.css">`

Author: Sergey is correct on this. I just added an initial suggestion as a start, and I think not embedding it will make standardization (i.e. sharing static files across repositories) easier for reasoning about logic

> - `host:port/{zpage}/style.css` SHOULD contain the styling logic. This CAN also be embedded in the HTML, but SHOULD be separated and linked in the page head using `<link rel="stylesheet" href="/{zpage}/style.css">`

Author: I added the link to the future possibilities section (which includes static file centralization) so that the static files can be better understood!

- If server-side only:

>   - `host:port/{zpage}/{...}`, and other variants SHOULD display detailed information on the item described by the {...}

Author: This is referring to some current zPages implementations that only utilize server-side rendering. For example, inspecting sampled spans in OTel Java directs the user to another page. Something like `host:port/tracez?type=error&name=span1` should display sampled error spans with the name span1. I can add this example to that line to clarify things

- If adding client-side:

>   - `host:port/{zpage}/script.js` SHOULD return the frontend Javascript code if these zPages uses client-side interaction. This CAN also be embedded in the HTML, but SHOULD be separated and linked in the page head using `<script src="/{zpage}/script.js">`

Author: This is to describe different files and URLs that might be used between server-side only or server-side + client-side implementations. I think I can figure out a way to clear it up more

All zPages need some server-side rendering, but the data and UI layer MAY be separated by adding client-side functionality. This separation has benefits including 1.) allowing users to access isolated zPages data, such as when using wget on the endpoints serving JSON data, without HTML/CSS/Javascript and 2.) adding extensibility to zPages (e.g. the frontend can be centralized and used in multiple  OTel language repositories). This approach is detailed below.

> Instead of directly translating native data structures to HTML strings based on the stored information, the data layer MUST do 2 things depending on the webpage endpoint accessed: 1. Serve the static HTML, JS, and CSS files, which are consistent, not server generated, and not data dependent and 2. Act like a web REST API by translating stored data to JSON. Whether the data layer does one or the other depends on which URL endpoint is accessed; the former is intended for the initial zPages load, and latter for user interactions. If the client requests the data via a request parameter or "Accept" HTTP header, that data should be available as a JSON-encoded response.

Reviewer: I believe the intent to say that you can see data without JavaScript or browser or consume this data with alternative tooling. But there is a standardized set of html+JS+css files that would allow to see a nice UI without the need to install any tools.

> Instead of directly translating native data structures to HTML strings based on the stored information, the data layer MUST do 2 things depending on the webpage endpoint accessed: 1. Serve the static HTML, JS, and CSS files, which are consistent, not server generated, and not data dependent and 2. Act like a web REST API by translating stored data to JSON. Whether the data layer does one or the other depends on which URL endpoint is accessed; the former is intended for the initial zPages load, and latter for user interactions. If the client requests the data via a request parameter or "Accept" HTTP header, that data should be available as a JSON-encoded response.

Reviewer: I agree, some styling wouldn't hurt on these paragraphs

> Instead of directly translating native data structures to HTML strings based on the stored information, the data layer MUST do 2 things depending on the webpage endpoint accessed: 1. Serve the static HTML, JS, and CSS files, which are consistent, not server generated, and not data dependent and 2. Act like a web REST API by translating stored data to JSON. Whether the data layer does one or the other depends on which URL endpoint is accessed; the former is intended for the initial zPages load, and latter for user interactions. If the client requests the data via a request parameter or "Accept" HTTP header, that data should be available as a JSON-encoded response.

Author: Here, consistent means that the HTML/CSS/JS file code themselves are the same for each page render, although JS operations modify the HTML DOM depending on the data. Sergey describes my intent pretty well, as the data should be viewable without a browser in JSON form like a standard API. I'll be happy to fix things accordingly to be less confusing!

> If using the server/client approach for the HTTP server, the following endpoints and data formatting (using proto3 definitions) SHOULD be used for serving JSON:

Author: I agree it would be ideal to use JSON. I used proto3 since they're [more well-defined and stable](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto#maturity-level) within the spec than JSON and can translate to JSON nicely still. JSON itself isn't as specific with their data types (i.e. precision of ints), so I'm wondering about suggestions to go about this if we want to change proto3 to JSON here?

- Tracez
  - `host:post/tracez/api/aggregations` SHOULD return `repeated TracezCounts`, which describes of error, running, and latency counts for all span name groupings. The latency array size MUST equal exactly the number of latency buckets used.

    ```proto3
    message TracezCounts {

>           string name = 1;

Author: Yes, it is and I'll update it accordingly!!

>           repeated uint32 latency = 2;

Author: On line 120, I mentioned `Latency bands are determined by the developer, but they MUST be increasing in duration and map to what is determined within Tracez.` but could be more specific about it

          uint32 running = 3;
          uint32 error = 4;
        }
    ```

  - `host:post/tracez/api/latency/{bucket_index}/{span_name}` SHOULD return `repeated LatencyData`, which describes latency sampled spans with the name {span_name} at latency band index {bucket_index}. Latency bands are determined by the developer, but they MUST be increasing in duration and map to what is determined within Tracez. The array MUST be size sampled_max or less.

    ```proto3

>     message LatencyData {

Reviewer: @jajanet you can add a TODO saying that review of the need for these fields is needed.

>     message LatencyData {

Author: I'll add that, thanks for catching that!

>     message LatencyData {

Author: The suggested TODO is appended to the line 167 TODO!

          bytes traceid = 1;
          bytes spanid = 2;
          bytes parentid = 3;
          fixed64 start = 4;

>           fixed64 end = 5;

Reviewer: good idea to rename these in the definition

          repeated opentelemetry.proto.common.v1.KeyValue attributes = 6; // [1]
          repeated Event events = 7; // [2]
          repeated Link links = 8; // [3]
    }
    ```

  - `host:post/tracez/api/running/{span_name}` SHOULD return `repeated RunningData`, which describes running sampled spans with the name {span_name}. The array MUST be size sampled_max or less.

    ```proto3
    message RunningData {
          bytes traceid = 1;
          bytes spanid = 2;
          bytes parentid = 3;
          fixed64 start = 4;
          repeated opentelemetry.proto.common.v1.KeyValue attributes = 5; // [1]

>           repeated Event events = 7; // [2]

Author: Total accident, thanks for pointing it out!
